# L1 Uge 5

## 1

## 1.1 Opg 5

What is the negation of each of these propositions?

A) Mei has an MP3 player

- Mei does not have an MP3 player

B) Ther is no pollution in New Jersey

- Ther is pollution in New Jersey

C) $2 + 1 = 3$

- $2 + 1 \ne 3$
  
D) The summer in Maine is hot and sunny

- The summer in Maine is not hot and sunny(cold and rainny)

## 1.1 Opg 13

Let $p$ and $q$ be the propositions
$p$: It is below freezing.
$q$: It is snowing.
Write these propositions using $p$ and $q$ and logical connectives (including negations).

A) It is below freezing and snowing

- $p \land q$

B) It is below freezing but not snowing

- $p \land \neg q$

C) It is not below freezing and it is not snowing

- $\neg p \land \neg q$

D) It is either snowing or below freezing(er both)

- $p \lor q$

E) If is is below freezing, it is also snowing

- $p \Rightarrow q$

F) Either it is below freezing or it is snowing, but it is not snowing if it is below freezing

- $p \oplus q$

G) That it is below freezing is neccessary and sufficient for is to be snowing

- $p \equiv q$

## 1.1 Opg 31

How many rows appear in a truth table for each of these
compound propositions?

A) $p \Rightarrow \neg q$

- 4

B) $(p \lor \neg r) \land (q \lor \neg s)$

- 8

C) $q \lor p \lor \neg s \lor \neg r \lor \neg t \lor u$

- 12

D) $(p \land r \land t) \Leftrightarrow (q \land t)$

- 8

## 1.1 Opg 33

Construct a truth table for each of these compound propositions.

A) $p \land q$

$p$ | $q$ | $p \land q$
:---:|:---:|:---:
T | T | T
T | F | F
F | T | F
F | F | F

B) $p \lor \neg q$

$p$ | $q$ | $\neg q$ | $p \lor \neg q$
:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:
T | T | F | T
T | F | T | T
F | T | F | F
F | F | T | T

C) $(p \lor \neg q) \Rightarrow q$

$p$ | $q$ | $\neg q$ | $p \lor \neg q$ | $(p \lor \neg q) \Rightarrow q$
:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:
T | T | F | T | T
T | F | T | T | F
F | T | F | F | T
F | F | T | T | F

D) $(p \lor q) \Rightarrow (p \land q)$

$p$ | $q$ | $p \lor q$ | $p \land q$ | $(p \lor q) \Rightarrow (p \land q)$
:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:
T | T | T | T | T
F | T | T | F | F
T | F | T | F | F
F | F | F | F | T

## 2

## 1.3 Opg 6

Use a truth table to verify the first De Morgan law

$\neg (p \land q) \equiv \neg p \lor \neg q$

$p$ | $q$ | $\neg p$ | $\neg q$ | $\neg (p \land q)$ | $\neg p \lor \neg q$
:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:
T | T | F | F | F | F
F | T | T | F | T | T
T | F | F | T | T | T
F | F | T | T | T | T

## 1.3 Opg 7

Use De Morgan’s laws to find the negation of each of the
following statements

A) Jan is rich and happy

- Jan is not rich and happy -> Jan is not rich or not happy

B) Carlos will bicycle or run tomorrow

- Carlos will not bicycle or run tomorrow -> Carlos will not bicycle and not run tomorrow

C) Mei walks or takes the bus to class

- Mei does not walk or take the bus to class -> Mei does not walk and does not take the bus to class

D) Ibrahim is smart and hard working

- Ibrahim is not smart and hard working -> Ibrahim is not smart or not hard working

## 1.3 Opg 19

Determine whether $(\neg q \land (p \Rightarrow q)) \Rightarrow \neg p$ is a tautology.

$p$ | $q$ | $\neg p$ | $\neg q$ | $p \Rightarrow q$ | $\neg q \land (p \Rightarrow q)$ | $(\neg q \land (p \Rightarrow q)) \Rightarrow \neg p$
:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:
T | T | F | F | T | F | T
F | T | T | F | T | F | T
T | F | F | T | F | F | T
F | F | T | T | T | T | T

- It is a tautology

## 3

a) Hvis $p$ er sand, or $q$ er falsk er $p \land q$ sand.

- Falsk

b) Hvis $p$ er falsk, er $\neg p \lor q$ sand.

- Sand

c) Hvis $p$ er sand, og $q$ er falsk, er $p \oplus q$ sand.

- Sand

d) Hvis $p \lor q$ er sand, er $p$ også nødvendigvis sand.

- Falsk

e) $p \lor q$ er sand, hvis og kun hvis $p$ er sand.

- Falsk

f) Hvis $p \land q$ er sand, er $p \lor q$ også sand.

- Sand

g) Hvis $p \Rightarrow q$ er sand, og $p$ er sand, er $q$ også sand.

- Sand

h) Hvis $p \Rightarrow q$ er sand, og $q$ er falsk, er $p$ også falsk.

- Sand
