# L5 Uge 9

## 1

### 5.1 Opg 11

A) Find a formula for

$\frac{1}{2} + \frac{1}{4} + \frac{1}{8} + ... + \frac{1}{2^n}$

by examining the values for this expresstion for small valuse of n.

- $n \ge 1$

$$P(n):\sum_{i=1}^n \frac{1}{2^i}$$

$$P(1):\frac{1}{2}$$

$$P(2):\frac{1}{2} + \frac{1}{4}=\frac{3}{4}$$

$$P(3):\frac{1}{2} + \frac{1}{4} + \frac{1}{8}=\frac{7}{8}$$

$$P(4):\frac{1}{2} + \frac{1}{4} + \frac{1}{8} + \frac{1}{16}=\frac{15}{16}$$

$$P(n) = \frac{2^n-1}{2^n}$$

B) Prove the formula you conjectured in part A)

Basis:

$$P(1): \frac{2^1 - 1}{2^1} = \frac{2-1}{2} = \frac{1}{2}$$

$$P(n):\frac{1}{2} + \frac{1}{4} + \frac{1}{8} + ... + \frac{1}{2^n} = \frac{2^n - 1}{2^n}$$

$$P(n+1):\frac{1}{2} + \frac{1}{4} + \frac{1}{8} + ... + \frac{1}{2^n} + \frac{1}{2^{n+1}} = \frac{2^n - 1}{2^n} + \frac{1}{2^{n+1}}$$

$$P(n+1):\frac{2^n - 1}{2^n} + \frac{1}{2^{n+1}} = \frac{2(2^n-1) + 1}{2^{n+1}} = \frac{2^{n+1} - 2 + 1}{2^{n+1}} = \frac{2^{n+1}-1}{2^{n+1}}$$

$$\forall n \in \N: n \ge 1: (P(n) \Rightarrow P(n+1))$$

$$\square$$

### 5.1 Opg 18

Let $P(n)$ be the statment that $n! < n^n$, where $n$ is an integer greater than 1

A) What is the statment $P(2)$?

- $P(2):2! < 2^2$

B) Show that $P(2)$ is true, completing the basis step of a proof by mathematical induction that $P(n)$ is true for all integers $n$ greater than 1

- $2! = 2 \cdot 1 = 2$
- $2^2 = 2 \cdot 2 = 4$
- $2 < 4$

C) What is the inductive hypothesis of a proof by mathematical induction that $P(n)$ is ture for all integer $n$ greater than 1

- $P(n): n! < n^n$

D) What do you need to prove in the inductive step of a proof by mathematical induction that $P(n)$ is true for all integers n greater than 1?

- Prove, that $P(n) \Rightarrow P(n+1)$, for all $n \ge 1$

E) Complete the inductive step of a proof by mathematical induction that P(n) is true for all integers n reater than 1.

$$P(n): n! < n^n$$

Assume that $P(k): k! < k^k$ is true

$$P(k+1): (k+1)! < (k+1)^{k+1} $$

$$(k+1)! = (k+1) \cdot k!$$

$$< (k+1) \cdot k^k$$

$$< (k+1) \cdot (k+1)^n = (k+1)^{k+1}$$

$$\forall n \in \Z: n \ge 1: (P(n) \Rightarrow P(n+1))$$

$$\square$$

F) Explain why these steps show that this inequality is true whenever n is an integer greater than 1.

- By checking the basis case, we can see that mutliplying both side by $(n+1)$, the inequality still holds, and that the right side grows much faster than the left.

### 5.1 Opg 49

What is wrong with this “proof” that all horses are the same color?

Let $P(n)$ be the proposition that all the horses in a set of $n$ horses are the same color.

Basis Step: Clearly, $P(1)$ is true.

Inductive Step: Assume that $P(k)$ is true, so that all the horses in any set of $k$ horses are the same color. Consider any $k + 1$ horses; number these as horses $1, 2, 3, … , k, k + 1$. Now the first $k$ of these horses all must have the same color, and the last $k$ of these must also have the same color. Because the set of the first $k$ horses and the set of the last $k$ horses overlap, all $k + 1$ must be the same color. This shows that $P(k + 1)$ is true and finishes the proof by induction

- The basis step does not check anything, and just states that $P(1)$ is true.
- The inductive step just assumes that all horses in the set has the same color.
- So this "proof" states that if we assume that all horses are the same color then they all are the same color.
